Influenza pandemic, 1918.
Of course not. Our nights are not filled  with worries about scarlet fever, mala ria, or bubonic plague. Cholera doesn't 
run rampant through our communities; river blindness, black  water fever, and elephantia sis are third world exotica. 
Few female readers will die in childbir th, and even fewer of those reading this  page are likely to be malnourished.
Thanks to revolutionary advances in medicine and public health, our patterns of disease have changed, and we are no 
longer kept awake at night worrying about infectious diseases (except, of course, AIDS or tuberculosis) or the 
diseases of poor nutrition or hygiene. As a measure of this, consider the leading causes of death in the United States in 
1900: pneumonia, tuberculosis, and influenza (and, if you were young, female, and inclined toward risk taking, 
childbirth). When is the last time you heard of scads of people dying of the flu? Yet the flu, in 1918 alone, killed 
many times more people than throughout the course of that most barbaric of conflicts, World War I.
Our current patterns of disease would be unrecognizable to our great-grandparents or, for that matter, to most 
mammals. Put succinctly, we ge t different diseases and are li kely to die in different ways
from most of our ancestors (or from most humans curr ently living in the less privileged areas of this 
planet). Our nights are filled with
worries about a different class of diseases; we are now living well enough and long enough to slowly fall apart.
The diseases that plague us now are ones of slow accu mulation of damage—heart dis ease, cancer, cerebrovascular 
disorders. While none of these diseas es is particularly pleasant, they certainly mark a big improvement over 
succumbing at age twenty after a week of sepsis or dengue feve r. Along with this relatively  recent shift in  the patterns 
of disease have come changes in the way we perceive the disease process. We have come to recognize the vastly 
complex intertwining of our biology and our emotions, the endless ways in which our personalities, feelings, and 
thoughts both reflect and influence the events in our bodies. One of the most interesting manifestations of this 
recognition is understanding that extreme emotional disturba nces can adversely affect us . Put in the parlance with 
which we have grown familiar, stress can make us sick, and a critical shift in medicine has been the recognition that 
many of the damaging diseases of slow accumulation can be either cause d or made far worse by stress.
In some respects this is nothing new. Centuries ago, sensit ive clinicians intuitively recognized the role of individual 
differences in vulnerabi lity to disease. Two individuals could get the same disease, yet the courses of their illness 
could be quite different and in vague, subjective ways might  reflect the personal character istics of the individuals. Or 
a clinician might have sensed that certain types of people we re more likely to contract certain types of disease. But 
since the twentieth centu ry, the addition of rigorous science to thes e vague clinical perceptions has made stress 
physiology—the study of how the body responds to stressful events—a real discipline. As a result, there is now an 
extraordinary amount of physiological, biochemical, and mo lecular information availabl e as to how all sorts of 
intangibles in our lives can affect very real bodily ev ents. These intangibles can include emotional turmoil, 
psychological characteristics, our  position in society, and how our society tr eats people of that position. And they can 
influence medical issues such as whether cholesterol gum s up our blood vessels or is safely cleared from the 
circulation, whether our fat cells stop listening to insulin and plunge us into diabetes, whether neurons in our brain 
will survive five minutes without oxygen during a cardiac arrest.Page 5 of 212
8/9/2009 file://C:\Users\OMID \Documents\Downloads\Compressed\zebras\Wh y_Zebras.htm